Neural networks
Week Week 4
Perception is a small computing unit that can take small inputs and make
predictions.
Decision boundary represents the threshold at which the model switches
its prediction from one class to another.

Supervised learning
A branch of machine learning (different from unsupervised learning,
reinforcement learning, etc etc.)
Also one type of learning that humans do, kindof (maybe)
Supervised Learning:
Construct a decision boundary using a set of data points where you
know the inputs and the true output
This is also called “classification” - dividing data points into distinct
classes
Can also have “regression” - learn a continuous function, not just a
boundary
Supervised learning always has two parts:
1. A way to represent a decision boundary of some shape – “hypothesis
space”
E.g, a perceptron is a way to represent a decision boundary.
The hypothesis space for a perceptron is the set of all possible
lines/planes in n dimensions

Neural networks

1

2. A way to define/adjust a specific boundary to fit some data points –
“learning”
Perceptron learning rule- method of tweaking the weights to get a desired
line.

Examples of Supervised Learning Methods
A way to represent a DB + how to adjust the DB based on data
A perceptron is a linear decision boundary
Perceptron learning rule is a way to set weights to match a set of data
A multi-layer perceptron (MLP) is a type of neural network that can
represent a non-linear decision boundary
Need a slightly different learning rule to set weights
A neural network is a more general term that includes MLPs and also
networks with fancier neurons
Backpropagation is one of the most common learning rules for NNs
i.e Neural networks is a way to represent a function and
backpropagation is like an updation rule.
A decision tree is a different kind of decision boundary altogether! Not a
neural network at all. Represents complex logical functions.
There is a decision tree learning rule called ID3 that takes a bunch of
data points and constructs a decision tree from it

What is the goal of supervised learning?
If we already know the inputs and true output for our data, why bother with
all this decision boundary business?
Generalization: Learn from one set of data (training data), and be able to
apply the same decision boundary to make decisions about new data
points never seen before
Make decision = apply label = classify = predict (same terms)

Neural networks

2

Overfitting – learning a decision boundary that overly matches the training
data but does not generalize well
Essentially, it is too specific.

Examples of supervised learning
1. Look at pictures of venomous snakes to learn which ones to avoid in the
wild
Training data: Photos of individual snakes
Generalisation: New individual snakes never seen, but the same species
Overfitting: perfectly able to classify pictures you’ve seen but unable to
determine new snakes.
2. Learn to recognise letters of the alphabet
Training data: Particular fonts, handwriting, illustrations
Generalisation: New fonts, handwriting, never before seen
AI struggles with OCR (optical character recognition)
3. Predict what consumers will buy from your shopping website
Training data: Past consumers, how they browsed, what they bought
Generalisation: New website visitors
^^ commercial applications of supervised learning
4. Decide if an MRI scan shows evidence of a tumour or not
Training data: Scans from a bunch of patients and their diagnoses
Generalisation: Scans from new patients
Many uses, both scientific and commercial/application-oriented

Neural networks

3

What are “Features” in supervised learning?
The inputs = features
Often, we have to decide what these are.
UCI Machine Learning repository is a famous place to find supervised
learning datasets on all kinds of topics
https://archive.ics.uci.edu/
Truly one of the classic, foundational resources that drove a huge
amount of ML research for the past few decades
Instance = data points

Artificial Neural Networks
Current “champion” among machine learning methods for supervised
learning
But other methods are still used—Depends on the problem
Inspired by how neurons in the brain integrate information and pass it
along to other neurons
Many differences between ANNs and real brain neurons and networks

https://theconversation.com/were-told-ai-neural-networks-learn-the-way-humans-do-aneuroscientist-explains-why-thats-not-the-case-183993

Neural networks

4

Multi-layer networks

Multi layered perceptron (MLP)

This network has
1. two input nodes,
2. one hidden layer with two nodes,
3. one output node
Nodes in the hidden layer can represent values that are based on, but
different from, the inputs
Hidden layers allow you to build more complex functions (i.e. more complex
decision boundaries)

Called ‘fully connected’ when everything is connected but it does not have to be

Neural networks

5

Layers of neurons but all of them may not be connected to each other.

AlexNet is a convolutional neural network architecture developed for
image classification tasks

CNN- (convolutional neural network) A CNN is composed of an input
layer, an output layer, and many hidden layers in between. These layers
perform operations that alter the data with the intent of learning features
specific to the data.

Very big and complex networks
Good because they can represent very complex decision boundaries
Bad because it is difficult to find a set of weights that will make the network
do what you want.
Every weight influences not just its own little node, but ALSO every other
node that is somewhere downstream in the network

Neural networks

6

So how to pick a good set of weights?
Perceptron update rule: Iteratively tweak weights to reduce the error

Fancier idea: Iteratively tweak weights to follow the slope of the error
function

Gradient descent—type of optimisation

Neural networks

7

Gradient descent is a general optimisation algorithm
Optimisation: Given an arbitrary function over some inputs, we want to find
which inputs minimise (or maximise) the value of that function
^^ Find the ‘x’ where ‘y’ is minimum/maximum
An exhaustive search would be easy and effective.
But what if you can’t conduct an exhaustive search?
Hill climbing: Start at a random point, look at your neighbours, and go
from there.
The issue here is that the random start point that is chosen could
impact the end point—may not end up at the global minimum/maximum
but rather the local minimum/maximum
Often works with enough starts
Instead of looking at your neighbours, discretely, just look at which
way the slope is pointing and go that way(?)
How can we calculate the slope of a function?
Take the derivative! i.e., the gradient (for a multivariable function
Derivative- The rate of change of a function, or the slope of the
tangent line at a particular point on a function

Gradient descent
Function you want to minimise: F
Calculate the gradient: ∇F

Neural networks

8

Wherever you are, just look at the value of ∇F at that point…
Take a step in the direction -∇F
Minus because we want to minimize the function F
How big of a step?
Learning rate η
Step = η * -∇F

Gradient descent for neural networks
Think about the error of a neural network (y_true - y_pred)
Error of a neural network- A function defined over (not over the inputs to
the network, rather defined over—) the space of all possible weights
If the error function is differentiable… then we can use gradient descent to
try to adjust the weights in order to minimise the error

Problem
If the error function includes the step function, it is not differentiable!

Solution: Smooth out the step function! “Sigmoid” function is a common
one

Gradient descent in a sigmoid neural network

Neural networks

9

This whole thing is differentiable!
And we can define the error so that it is easily differentiable too
“Backpropagation” is a method for doing gradient descent where you
repeatedly compute the derivative of the error function with respect to the
weights, starting at the output layer and working your way ”backwards”
through the network
It is a way to do gradient descent by taking derivatives over and over
and looking at how the erro changes throughout as a function of the
weights.

How much data to use to calculate error at each
iteration?
True gradient descent: Use all the data at every time step
Get the most accurate idea of which way the slope is pointing, given ALL of
our data
Tough to compute, if we have a lot of data
Stochastic (or “batch”) gradient descent: Use a random batch of the data at
every time step
Epoch – one pass through all of the training data
Usually train over multiple epochs

Play with a NN:
https://playground.tensorflow.org/

Neural networks

10

